---
toc: false
layout: post
description:
categories: [recipes]
title: Focaccia
---

(Based on [Ethan Chlebowski's recipe](https://www.ethanchlebowski.com/cooking-techniques-recipes/how-to-make-focaccia), but without all the ads and page bloat that crash my iPad)

## Ingredients

For the dough:

- 450g flour
- 335g lukewarm water (105-115ºF)
- 9g instant yeast (or 11-12g active dry yeast)
- 9g salt
- 9g olive oil

For baking:

- 20g olive oil
- 20g water

## Preparation

1. Proof the yeast

    If using active dry yeast: Mix the yeast, water, and one spoonful of the flour until dissolved. Wait 5-10 minutes until a light foam surfaces to ensure the yeast is alive. In the meantime, mix the salt and the rest of the flour until evenly distributed.

    Once the yeast is proofed, combine the wet and dry ingredients and mix until no dry flour remains and a the dough is a shaggy ball. Add the olive oil and work until it's all absorbed. Cover and let rest (autolyse) for 20 minutes (and [don't use a towel](https://www.kingarthurbaking.com/blog/2023/04/18/never-cover-rising-bread-dough-with-towel)).

2. Bulk fermentation

    Once rested, stretch and fold by grabbing a corner of the dough in the bowl, lift straight up to stretch the dough as high as it will go without tearing and fold over to the other side. Rotate the bowl and perform three more reps of stretch and folds. Once folded, turn the dough over onto itself, cover and let rest another 25-30 minutes. This is one set of a stretch and fold - perform 3 more sets with 25-30 minutes rest in between.

    For each stretch and fold set, the dough should feel more elastic and stretch further without tearing with some air bubbles present. Once the dough feels hard to stretch out and fold over, you can stop folding and let the dough rest.

3. Second rise

    Drizzle olive oil into a 9x13 baking pan until the bottom is covered. After the last stretch and fold, turn the dough into the pan and gently work it to the edges. Note: If the dough is springing back from the edges, cover and let rest for 15-20 minutes before gently working to the edges.

    Cover the pan and let the focaccia proof for 45-60 minutes. At the end of proofing, the dough should be well risen and puffy with gas bubbles. Preheat the oven to 450ºF ([or 425ºF if baking in glass](https://www.kingarthurbaking.com/blog/2018/03/29/glass-or-metal-or-stoneware#:~:text=The%20standard%20advice%20for%20baking,up%20to%2010%20minutes%20longer.)).

4. Baking

    Dimple the proofed dough with wet fingers by gently pushing to the bottom of the pan, but do not accidentally go through the dough.

    Whisk the olive oil and water together with a fork until it emulsifies, about 2-3 minutes. Pour the mixture over the focaccia where it will pool into the dimples. Sprinkle flaky salt and fresh herbs over the top. If using other toppings like grape tomatoes, or olives, add them now too and gently press into the dough.

    Place on the middle rack of the oven and bake for 20-25 minutes until golden on top. Let rest under a cloth on a wire rack for 5 minutes before slicing.
